Good morning, everyone.
I want to welcome you this
morning to 64-bit In-Depth,
where we're going to try and answer
some of the questions we deferred
from yesterday's presentation.
There is a variety of 64-bit content
in other sessions through the week,
so I'll try and point
out to those as well.
As the voice of God said,
I'm Matthew Formica.
I'm the 64-bit software
evangelist at Apple.
So feel free to email me through
the week and post this week with
any 64-bit questions you may have,
and I'll try and get
those answered for you.
So, why are we here?
We're here because we completed
our transition to Intel hardware
this week with the announcement of
the Mac Pro 64-bit Intel hardware.
And we are transitioning in Leopard
to provide a full 64-bit API stack
to you in the operating system.
So we want to show you
how to use all of that.
And as you saw yesterday
in the 64-bit overview,
64-bit as an architecture is really
just another part of going universal.
It's another architecture that
gets built into your binary,
similar to going to Intel.
And in Leopard, we have, unlike Tiger,
we have just about the whole
API stack available to you for 64-bit.
And we'll talk about today
some of the exceptions to that.
And what does this mean to you?
Well, you should start thinking
about migrating to 64-bit.
For some of you who have
very performance-critical
applications or memory space needs,
now will be the right
time to move to 64-bit.
For others, it might be a little
longer transition time.
So, what are you going to learn today?
I'm going to walk you through the various
API changes for 64-bit and Leopard
to help you understand what's there,
what's not there,
what are good replacement
APIs for things.
And then I'll hand off to
Eric Albert to talk about some of
the other things that you might need
to be aware of when moving to 64-bit,
including how to handle tiger and
leopard differences and understanding
the actual 64-bit Intel architecture.
Thank you.
So, speaking of APIs changing,
why do our APIs need changing?
Well, the first reason is just
a fallout of being 64-bit.
We are an LP64 64-bit model,
which means longs, pointers,
and size T change size.
So, some of the fundamental data
types are changing size,
and thus our APIs need to adapt to that.
The 64-bit also means
applications can access more data.
So we need to change some of our
APIs to make sure that they can actually
reference those larger amounts of data.
And we want to do this in a way
that doesn't break compatibility
for existing 32-bit applications.
And so there are certain data types,
certain file formats on
disk that by statement or by
convention are fixed in size,
and we need to make sure that those
stay the same size for 64-bit.
And finally,
we need to make some changes through
our APIs because there's no mixed mode,
which means that your entire
process must be 32-bit or 64-bit.
And if you want to build
a 64-bit application,
everything you link against
must also be 64-bit.
And so there is no piecemeal solution.
The entire stack is going to go 64-bit.
We have a few principles that we
applied as we were changing the APIs.
One of them was consistency,
where we had to change
things in one framework.
We looked at making a similar
change in another framework
that might do something similar.
Secondly, we wanted good impedance match,
which is our way of saying we want
you to be able to take the results
of one routine and easily pass them
off to another without having to
do a lot of conversions in between.
And finally,
going to 64-bit is a good chance
for us to clean up our APIs and
help you modernize your application.
We don't have the same binary
compatibility restraints,
and so we can clear away some of the old
cruft that's in the Mac OS X API set.
This is something I want to emphasize
right here as we get started.
I'm going to be spending a lot of time
talking about the things that don't
work or work slightly differently,
but they're really just a small
subset of the thousands of APIs that
make up Carbon and Cocoa and the
other frameworks on the system.
Most APIs just work.
The transition is mostly about
those edge cases in the APIs and,
of course, 64-bit goof-ups like
truncating your pointers.
So we're going to walk through the
different frameworks on the system.
Let's start with API changes for Cocoa.
And if we start actually at
the very bottom of Cocoa,
which is the Objective-C language,
if you were at the Objective-C 2
sessions yesterday,
you heard that for 64-bit,
the runtime has been rewritten.
Certain low-level data
structures are now opaque,
and we have accessors to get
at what you previously just
got to by accessing structures.
And we have some new features that
are going to be coming to 64-bit
Objective-C applications only.
Moving up to the basic
data types in Cocoa,
nearly all ints have been replaced
with NSInteger or NSUInteger.
And these are data types,
type defs that can now
change to be long for 64-bit.
That way we aren't artificially hampered.
You can see the basic type def that we
use in the system headers to handle this.
Secondly, enumerations are not
predictably unsigned int.
The compiler actually looks at the
values in the enumeration and makes a
call as to what size things should be.
And that wasn't good enough for us,
and so we have now declared some
of the enumerations as NSInteger,
NSUInteger to make sure that
the base type is 64-bit capable.
And thirdly, a change that was mentioned
yesterday in the 64-bit overview,
all graphics-related floating
point quantities are now doubles.
CGFloat has grown in size,
and this was motivated by the
opportunity that moving to 64-bit
provided to make some changes that will
prepare us for the future when greater
precision is going to be needed.
I should mention that this
change permeates through
Carbon graphics calls as well.
There's a few classes that did
not make the cut to 64-bit.
The first couple are
NSMovieView and NSMovie.
And this should be no surprise.
QtKit is a great Cocoa API for
accessing QuickTime functionality.
And so the NSMovieView and NSMovie
classes have been on their way out,
actually, for a while.
Secondly, NS Quickdraw view is not
available to 64-bit applications,
and that's because Quickdraw
itself is not available,
and I'm going to go into that in a
lot more detail in a few minutes.
Instead, you'll want to use the
Cocoa Drawing system or go right
to the Quartz APIs directly.
NSMenuView is probably a class
that not a lot of you used,
which is good because
it's not there for 64-bit.
Instead, if you do need to do custom
view or custom drawing support
of menus or in your menus,
you can use the NSMenuItem class.
And I want to emphasize a
point that Ali made yesterday,
which is don't use unkeyed archiving.
You really want to use the
keyed archiving system.
Hopefully you've already ripped out
that old code from your application.
There's a script to help your
conversion if you are a 64-bit,
if you are a Cocoa application
wanting to move to 64-bit.
It's in developer extras.
It's a top script.
It automates some of the work.
It puts little comments and flags
things in your code to help you
find the things that need to change.
If you look at our documentation,
it gives you all the details
for how to actually run the
script against your code.
And then after you run it,
you run file merge to
see what it actually did,
to make sure that the changes it made
are what you actually want to happen.
The script will warn of a
variety of conversion problems.
Some of them are strictly
required by 64-bit.
Others are changes that are suggested to
help your APIs and your data structures
be able to handle larger amounts of data.
And that's pretty much the
summary of changes for Cocoa.
It's pretty straightforward.
There's new runtime
changes to Objective-C,
a few key types change.
There's this great script
to help you convert.
And the script is going to help you see
that you really want to be end-to-end
64-bit compatible in your application.
Just because your application
builds using PPC64 or
x86-64 as your architecture,
that does not mean that
you're actually done.
You want to make sure that you
can handle 64-bits worth of
data and do it efficiently.
Changes for Carbon are
a little more extensive.
Let's go through those now.
The first change we made was to
make SN32 and UN32 actually be
fixed to stay 32-bit in 64-bit.
They were actually defined such they
would have become 64-bit values.
Core Foundation has also had
several types redefined so that
they grow in size for 64-bit,
the basic CF index type
as well as a few others.
There are now new standard types
for consistent representation
of user-specified data.
And these keep their old
definition for 32-bit applications,
so your code doesn't have
to change if you're 32-bit,
but they become void stars for 64-bit.
And types that represent
offsets in the memory,
like byte count and byte offset,
are now longs for 64-bit applications
so that they can actually
reference all areas of memory.
Let's talk about a few pitfalls with
some of these common data types.
You really want to try and adopt these
standard types throughout your code base,
not just when interfacing
with the Carbon APIs.
One common problem is casting a pointer
to an SN32 that worked in 32-bit.
Of course, that's going to truncate
things in 64-bit.
Secondly, don't assume that a CF index
is the same size as an S32.
Here's an example of a call that
would not be correct for 64-bit.
And thirdly, on the flip side,
don't assume that all parameters scale
to 64-bits in 64-bit applications.
The collection manager, for example,
some of its parameters like
item size don't actually
grow to be 64-bits in size.
And if you assume they do,
you'll get a different set of crashes.
Pascal strings,
they've been around for a long
time since the very beginning,
but we've made a concerted effort
for our 64-bit applications to
actually remove them from the headers.
So wherever there were routines
that took a Pascal string,
there should now be replacements
that take a C string.
This doesn't mean that the compiler
doesn't support Pascal strings.
It still will,
so you don't have to instantly
change all your own code.
But this is just a steady migration
path that we've been on for some time.
Moving up the Carbon stack
to the file manager,
the FS spec data type
is finally going away.
And this type has had drawbacks
that we all know well.
It can only handle
31-character file names.
And so FS refs are what you
should be using for all of
your 64-bit file manager needs.
There are a few places in the file
manager APIs where an FS spec is still
needed just to be kind of passed in.
You can just pass null there now.
It doesn't really use it for anything.
But in general,
wherever you need a real object there,
you should be using FSRef.
A few other low-level managers that
we should talk about some changes for.
The memory manager has had a few changes.
There are routines
that are not available:
block move, block data, and block zero.
Instead, you should use the standard
memmove or B0 calls.
And believe it or not,
the resource manager
is moving on to 64-bit.
This is despite the fact that RezEdit
hasn't been revved since 1994.
There are a few new types
and some things going away.
The standard icon formats
are not available.
So no more color icons,
no more icon suites.
Instead,
you'll want to use icon refs or go right
to core graphics and use CG image refs.
64-bit Quickdraw is not available.
There is no 64-bit Quickdraw.
And Quickdraw has made a lot of
migrations through the years.
This is what it looked
like in the early days.
And we've revved it over
time to support color,
amongst other things.
But there's really a limit to how
far we could take the Quickdraw
APIs and underlying implementation.
And so on Mac OS X today,
we have a situation where
displays have gotten bigger,
transparency is used more,
and the technologies that
are available on Mac OS X,
like Core Image, Quartz Composer,
and the new Core Animation framework,
really don't speak the
language of Quickdraw.
They speak the language of Quartz.
And so now is a good time for you to
remove the last vestiges of Quickdraw
from your code and move over to Quartz.
Just for my own interest-- if
I could see a show of hands-- how
many of you think you still have
Quickdraw calls in your code?
Okay, that's a fair number of you.
So hopefully we can help make
the transition pretty smooth.
We've been talking about
this for a couple of years.
In Tiger, of course,
the Quickdraw APIs were deprecated.
For 32-bit applications in Leopard,
Quickdraw's still there,
but to move to 64-bit,
you'll need to make this change.
Let's talk about a few
more details of this.
There's some good reasons why
we're getting rid of QuickDraw.
It's not thread-safe.
It's got a fixed resolution,
so it's not resolution
independence ready.
And internal data structures
of QuickDraw are limited to
16-bit integer coordinates.
So you've probably noticed that
when you get larger images,
things start going wrong
above about 4K resolution.
So instead you'll need to transition,
and here's a short list of steps
that you'll need to take a look at,
one approach to moving to Quartz.
You'll want to start separating out your
UI code from your basic business logic.
A lot of old Carbon code intermingles
calls to the drawing routines with
calls for event handling and doing
other things in their application.
And because Quartz is a whole new
paradigm for how graphics are done,
you're going to want to try
and separate out your logic to
make the rewriting more easy.
Secondly, if you haven't already done so,
you should move to HIView
as a Carbon application.
And this will give you the right
foundation to start building
new graphics code on top of.
You'll want to start rethinking how you
approach drawing things with Quartz.
It's not a simple one-to-one
mapping between Quick Draw calls
and equivalent Quartz calls.
It's a different way of working.
Instead of working with shapes and
pens and transfer modes and pics,
you're going to be working with PDFs
and transparency paths and gradients.
Hopefully, step four is profit.
If we dive down into this
a little bit further,
you'll see that Quickdraw was built
around a basic set of primitives.
And all those primitives
were pixel-based,
so right in the calls you were
specifying exactly how many
pixels something should be.
Quartz 2D instead is based around paths.
So you describe a path which
builds up a set of geometry,
and that can easily scale to
whatever the resolution of
the final display actually is,
whether that be a monitor or a printer.
Quartz, unlike Quickdraw,
doesn't have any built-in
automatic redraw machinery.
It doesn't know anything about
visible regions and so on.
Instead, you should set up any clipping
manually for your CG context.
And there are some routines that do some
similar things in terms of clipping to
what you're familiar with with Quickdraw,
but the basic model is different.
When it comes to moving pixels around,
this is a big one.
There's no exact copy bits
functionality replacement in Quartz 2D.
Quartz doesn't know anything
about bits or pixels,
so ultimately it can't allow you
to do a copy bit sort of routine.
And it uses the alpha channel, actually,
instead of needing a specific mask.
So if you want to do the sort of thing
you've been doing with copy bits,
you should look at using
CG Context Draw Image.
We do have a bitmap context,
a bitmap backing store that is
available for core graphics,
and then you can use CG Context
Draw Image and friends.
There are a variety of other
similar APIs that can be used to
get similar functionality in Quartz.
You should come by our labs
if you actually want some help
converting from Quickdraw to Quartz,
and we can help you do that.
Because Quickdraw is going away,
this has a lot of impact to other
APIs that are part of Carbon,
because Quickdraw
spreads its fingers wide.
The Appearance Manager is going away.
It was mostly Quickdraw-based.
Instead,
you should use the HIFeam API that's
been available for a while.
Custom menu, window,
and control definitions
are no longer available.
You need to use custom HIVs instead.
Most of the routines in the font
manager are not available because
they're mostly Quickdraw based.
So instead, you should use the
Core Text font API that we have.
There are a few new routines we've
introduced in Leopard to help
you convert from font manager
data structures over to Core Text.
And as I mentioned earlier,
most of ICON services and
ICON utilities is no longer available.
Following in the same vein,
the drag manager has certain
routines that are not available,
the ones that take quick draw structures.
And when it comes to the event manager,
probably one of the biggest
ones that goes away is getMouse.
And I still remember some of my early
Macintosh programming being so excited
to call getMouse and do basic drawing
on the screen just following the mouse.
But getMouse returns coordinates
in the current graphics port.
And for 64-bit applications,
there is no current graphics port.
So instead, we've introduced a new
routine in Leopard,
HIGetMousePosition, that will let you do
equivalent functionality.
Let's talk about the Window Manager.
It's another big one that has some
changes that affect other APIs.
Carbon Windows must use compositing
mode to draw their content in 64-bit.
And compositing mode is something
that's been around for a while,
for a couple versions now in Mac OS X.
Hopefully most of you have
converted to that already.
How many of you are using composited
drawing mode for your Carbon apps?
How many of you know you're not
using composited drawing mode?
Okay,
for those of you who are not using it,
now will be the time to convert over.
You can do this in 32-bit as well,
so there's nothing special about it.
And as I say,
it's been around for a while,
so there's nothing new
to leopard with that.
So you must pass kWindowCompositing
attribute to the create
new window call in 64-bit,
or you will get an error
back from create new window.
So this brings up another
interesting issue.
If you need a, you can no longer use
Get CG Context from
Port or its ilk in 64-bit.
If you need a CG context for a window,
you'll need to pay attention to the
K event control draw Carbon event
and get the CG context through that.
The Dialog Manager just transparently
switches over to compositing mode
without any changes that you need
to make to your code in 64-bit.
The Carbon Event Manager has
some changes.
Non-compositing window
events are not available.
Instead, you'll want to use events
that operate on HI objects,
HI views, and CG contacts.
And there are a few new standard
types that are introduced as well.
We've got some other grab
bag Carbon API changes.
Basically, any APIs that were deprecated
prior to 10.5 are not available
to 64-bit applications on Leopard.
And there are a few others
that are not available.
The Code Fragment
Manager is not available.
The Device Manager is not available.
The Language Analysis Manager has
been replaced by the
Natural Language Processing API.
And the Desktop Manager functionality
can be obtained through a combination
of icon services and launch services.
The Sound Manager.
Simple to use API,
not very powerful compared
to today's core audio APIs.
The Sound Manager has been on
its way out for a while as well.
So it's not available
to 64-bit applications.
You'll want to take a look at core audio.
The List Manager is also biting
the dust for 64-bit applications.
That should be no surprise to you.
Use the data browser instead.
And some of the really old school text
processing APIs are also not available.
TextEdit and the Text Services Manager.
Instead, for 64-bit applications,
you'll want to use an HI TextView or,
new in Leopard,
we've got an HICocoView that allows you
to embed CocoView inside a Carbon window.
So you could put an NSTextView inside
an HICocoView and use that
in your Carbon application.
Hopefully you're getting the picture
here that most of the changes
we're making are pretty obvious,
what you would have expected,
and we're getting rid of APIs that
we've been encouraging you
to move off of for some time.
The Translation Manager has been
replaced by Translation Services in
the HI Services framework.
The Scrap Manager has been
replaced by the Pasteboard Manager.
And if you need to enumerate displays,
you'll no longer be able
to use the Display Manager,
including GD handles,
but you'll want to use
CG Direct Display and the Quartz
Display Services APIs to walk
through the list of what displays
are actually connected to a machine.
So in summary for Carbon,
you'll want to adopt the new
standard Carbon types in your code,
which means you'll need to go through
all of your old code to make sure
that not only are you interfacing
correctly with our routines,
but you are actually able to handle
large amounts of data in your code.
You're not truncating
things along the way.
You'll need to transition
from Quick Draw to Quartz.
And thirdly, you'll need to use
compositing window mode.
Hopefully most of you
are already doing that.
And good replacement
APIs are generally available.
We're getting rid of APIs that
we've deprecated for a while now,
and we've got pretty
good replacements there.
Carbon and Cocoa are two big buckets,
but there's kind of a other bucket
that I also wanted to talk about,
which is a variety of other
changes that you should be aware of
throughout the frameworks on Mac OS X.
And the first one is a basic new
way in CFBundle to allow you to
check the architectures that are
available for a given bundle.
This allows you to replace the sample
code that we've had out for a while
where you've got to actually kind
of munch through the Mako header
for a given binary to figure out
what architectures are in there.
So, nice new clean API to do that.
Second of all, the message framework,
a little-known framework that allowed
you to send emails through mail,
is not available to 64-bit applications.
Its functionality can be
easily duplicated through basic
Apple events sent to mail.
Open Transport is not
available to 64-bit apps.
How many of you are
relying on Open Transport?
Hopefully not many.
Just a couple of you.
Good.
CF Network is a good,
newer replacement API,
and BSD Sockets are a great,
really old replacement API.
AppleTalk is not available
to 64-bit applications.
There are other good ways of doing what
it did that have been around for a while.
When it comes to printing,
there's just a few notes on that.
PDEs that are 32-bit PDEs,
they're CF plugin-based,
will not load in 64-bit applications.
They will not show up
in the print dialog.
Instead,
there are new Cocoa-based PDE APIs that
you should take a look at.
You can check out the PDE plugin
interface dot h header to get
more information on using those.
And secondly,
the other bit of information you should
know about is that if you want to get
information from the PPD in a 64-bit app,
you'll need to use
CUPS instead of PPDlib.
Let's talk about QuickTime.
And this is going to be covered
in even more depth in one of the
QuickTime sessions this afternoon
by the QuickTime engineering team,
but I just wanted to give
you a little bit here.
The QuickTime C APIs are not available
to 64-bit applications on Leopard.
The code base is very old and crufty.
It's a little bit like
QuickDraw in some ways.
However, there are Carbon and
Cocoa ways of continuing to
access QuickTime content and
QuickTime functionality for 64-bit apps.
The biggest is QTKit, which is a new,
well, even not so new now,
QuickTime Objective-C API that's modern,
powerful, and functional,
and it's available to 64-bit
applications in Leopard.
A couple implications of this.
Since there's no QuickTime C APIs,
you can't get native
QuickTime identifiers out of
QtKit if you're a 64-bit app.
So you can't ask a Qt movie for its
QuickTime movie is the biggest example.
A bug in the Leopard preview that you
have right now is you can't actually
use a Qt movie view from a nib.
That's actually just broken right now.
But you can create one in code,
add it to your view,
and that will work fine.
This is something we'll fix pretty soon.
And the new capture classes that we've
just introduced in Leopard are not
yet available to 64-bit applications.
One other bit of detail is that nav
create preview depends on QuickTime,
so it's also not available
to 64-bit applications.
There are a variety of new
QuickLook preview facilities
that we've rolled out that are
going to be a part of Leopard.
Java on Mac OS X Leopard is available to,
natively, for 64-bit Intel only.
There is no PowerPC 64 Java.
And that's simply because
we license the JVM from Sun,
and they don't have a 64-bit
PowerPC implementation.
Speaking of Java,
Cocoa Java is not available as
well to 64-bit applications.
If we dive real low level in
the system to the driver level,
I have up here on the slide what
they told me to say about it,
which is basically that if you
are a driver that wants to access
more than 4 gigs of memory,
there are some changes
you'll need to make.
The kernel is staying 32 bit for Leopard.
That should be of help to you.
There's a session right after
this one that's going to be all
about I/O Kit related changes
for 64 bit computing as well as
there will be a discussion of some
Intel EFI related stuff in that session.
Let me talk for just a minute or
two about the state of 64-bit in
the Leopard preview that you have,
because we've talked to some
degree about what we plan to
do for Leopard for 64-bit,
but not everything's working in the
preview that you have available to you.
In the preview that you have,
nearly all the frameworks are available,
as I've described.
Nearly all the developer
tools are also available.
Xcode, Shark, Crash Reporter,
all of those have been 64-bit enabled.
Basic language interpreters, however,
are still 32-bit on the system.
That's something that we're
going to correct soon.
And there's still some performance work,
some basic structural work
that we do for 32-bit that we
haven't yet done for 64-bit.
Prebinding at the system framework level
is not something that we've done yet.
Of course,
you don't need to pay attention
to that for applications.
There's no system shared
region in 64-bit yet either.
There are some frameworks and
APIs that are not yet available
to 64-bit that we plan to make
available by the time Leopard GMs.
Let me just go over some of those here.
Of course,
scripting languages I've mentioned.
Parts of DO are not
working in this preview,
which means that spell checking and
sync services are also not working.
Objective C2 garbage collection
in this preview is not enabled
for 64-bit applications.
That's something we're
going to change by GM.
DVD playback is available only
to PowerPC 64-bit applications,
not on Intel 64.
And X11,
if I have my information correct,
is available to PowerPC 64 applications,
but not Intel.
There's a bug as well.
If you are a sophisticated
C++ application,
you use templates,
and you use the -f visibility inlines
hidden flag to help reduce the amount
of symbols that are in your application
and thus improve launch times,
you're going to get a linker error
when trying to build for 64-bit.
The error is code gen problem
can't use rel 32 to external
symbol or message similar to that.
If you get that, that's just a bug that
we're going to fix.
The easy work around
is don't use that flag.
And with that,
I'd like to turn things over to
Eric Albert to talk about the 64-bit
architecture at the lower levels.
Hey, there.
So to go back to the slide that
Matt showed at the beginning,
so he's covered now our
API changes for 64-bit.
And I'm going to talk about how to
find your application's dependencies
to make sure that everything that
you need is 64-bit before you
actually move your own application.
Because well, if the frameworks that
you need aren't there,
then building your application in
64-bit won't work all that well,
because you won't be able to run it.
Then 64-bit in Leopard and Tiger,
which can sometimes be a little
bit complicated to think about,
how the two operating systems interact,
and I'll explain why.
And finally, what's new in our latest
and greatest architecture,
64-bit on Intel.
So first, finding 64-bit dependencies.
The reason why this is important
is that even though almost
all of our system frameworks,
and nearly all the ones that
we're going to support for
64-bit are built 64-bit today,
there are obviously a lot of applications
out there that are dependent on
third party libraries and frameworks.
It's good to figure out which
ones of those you'll need
before you do that transition,
much as you had to do for Intel.
So the way to do that is to run
OTool-L to point that at the actual
application binary that you have.
So in this case, I picked Transmit,
which is a nifty FTP client
from the folks at Panic.
And you can see here that actually three
of the frameworks that Transmit pulls in,
FTP Kit, Growl, and Neon,
are not Apple frameworks.
So this means that in the
Leopard preview today,
obviously these three frameworks, well,
they're not part of the operating system.
So they aren't 64-bit today,
unless the Panic folks
have worked really,
really hard over the past
two days to port them.
So those three would then have to move
to 64-bit before Transmit itself could
actually link as a 64-bit application.
Now, how do you actually check those
to see if they have 64-bit slices?
You run the file command
from the command line.
So here I've run it on core
foundation on the Leopard preview,
and you see that it has
all four architectures.
Of course,
if it only reports PPC and I3D6,
then that framework isn't 64-bit yet.
How about 32-bit versus
64-bit in Leopard and Tiger?
And basically,
how to go about running the right
application at the right time.
This is a little bit tricky,
but I'll try to explain it.
Mac OS X will choose to run the
64-bit slice of a binary when
you're running on a 64-bit Mac.
And so what we've always tried to
do in Mac OS X is to run the right
application when the user goes
ahead and double-clicks something.
This is why, for example, on Intel,
when we introduced the Intel systems,
then when you built your
application universal,
the user double-clicks it and
the Intel side launches because,
of course, that's what you'd want.
The idea here is if you've built
your application for 64-bit,
that's because you probably actually
want folks to use the 64-bit side.
And so we'll run that by default.
But sometimes 32-bit is the right choice,
even for an application that
has both 32- and 64-bit slices.
So some examples of this are
32-bit plug-ins in browsers.
So for example,
if Safari was 64-bit today,
but say the Windows Media plug-in
was still 32-bit and you needed to
view something in Windows Media,
then you'd want to be able to run that as
a-- you'd want to be able to run Safari,
perhaps, as a 32-bit application.
This applies to any
applications that have plug-ins,
a variety of pro applications do.
And also,
32-bit native libraries for Java, Perl,
and other command line--
I don't want to call them
interpreters because Java isn't,
but things like this that--
You can't determine at launch
time whether the application,
whether the libraries that
you're going to try to load
later are 32-bit or 64-bit.
If you have a Java application
with 32-bit JNI libraries,
then when you run user bin Java,
we don't know that that's what
you're going to try to load.
So we'll have to provide some way for
you to run a 32-bit Java in that case.
The way to do that is to
use the new POSIX Spawn API,
which was introduced in Leopard.
Unfortunately,
the flags that you need to pass
to POSIX Spawn to get it to choose
between 32-bit and 64-bit are not
currently in your Leopard preview.
That will, of course,
be added before Leopard ships.
So this will be the interface,
but you can't quite use it today.
The way to do this today, then,
the workaround for you while you're
doing development is to use lipo-thin to
remove the 64-bit slice of your binary.
And yes, it's kind of inconvenient,
but we will make this better.
[Transcript missing]
So the answer to that is to build
the 64-bit side of your binary,
so to build your PPC64 and x8664
architectures with a deployment
target of Mac OS X 10.5.
Now, unfortunately, today,
this doesn't actually have a
material impact on what launches,
but before Leopard ships,
then this will actually be fixed.
And when you set this deployment target,
then the right thing will happen.
By that, I mean that if you set a
deployment target of 10.5 for
the 64-bit slice of your binary,
then when you launch that
binary on a tiger system,
the 32-bit side will run,
and when you launch that
binary on a Leopard system,
the 64-bit side will run.
[Transcript missing]
So what do these changes
actually mean for running code
and for the performance of code?
Well, more registers, as I mentioned,
means that more things are possible,
that we can do interesting things
with the calling convention and
with code generation that just
simply couldn't be done for 32-bit.
Again, the most noticeable one is
the better calling convention,
the fact that we can actually
pass arguments and registers and
do the right thing with passing
floating-point arguments to functions.
So I'll talk a little bit more
about that in a minute or two.
Faster compute-intensive code.
When you have more registers available,
then you don't have to
spill things onto the stack.
You don't have to go out to memory.
You can keep more data in registers
and manipulate more values faster.
Faster access to external
functions and global variables.
This comes about because we
have PC relative addressing,
so we can actually reference
these things much more directly
than we otherwise could.
We don't have to go through
little funks in the code.
and faster floating point code because,
actually, first of all,
the better calling convention
helps out floating point,
and secondly, again,
doubling the number of registers
helps that out as well.
So overall, you look at this and you say,
hey, that sounds pretty good.
There's one caveat.
Of course,
this is a shift from 32-bits to 64-bits,
so larger longs and pointers means
that fewer items fit in the cache.
It's not like your Mac Pro, say,
has an 8-megabyte L2 cache
when you're dealing with 64-bit
code and a 32-megabyte one
when dealing with 32-bit code.
You get the same cache size
no matter what you're running,
so you can fit more longs and
pointers in the cache when
you're running a 32-bit code.
But the change here that gives us
more registers and that changes the
calling convention and so on and so
forth means that many applications
will actually end up running
slightly faster on 64-bit Intel,
regardless of whether they
need the larger address space.
Now,
this isn't -- I have to be very clear
here -- this is not a reason in and
of itself to go out and move all
of your code to 64-bit right away.
So as we mentioned at the
64-bit overview yesterday,
when you run the first 64-bit
application in the system,
that brings in a 64-bit framework stack,
so that has additional
memory requirements.
But the reason why I mention this
is that if you happen to have a
compute-intensive application,
in particular folks in scientific
computing or anyone who's just
really trying to use the computer
to do the work that you're doing,
you're going to have to
have a lot of memory.
So if you happen to have a computer
that's really trying to use the computer
to do the work that you're doing,
you're going to have to
have a lot of memory.
just really trying to eke every
last cycle out of the CPU,
then 64-bit on Intel in particular is
something that you may want to look at.
Now some applications actually
end up running a little bit slower
with this because of that trade
off that if you have a lot of
longs and pointers in your code,
then that may more than offset
the performance boost that you
get from the register changes.
But if you do have a
compute intensive app,
then I encourage you to take
a look at this and try it.
And if it's an application
where that additional,
say, 10% or so may make a
significant difference,
then great,
this may turn out really well for you.
[Transcript missing]
How does that calling
convention actually work?
Well,
we decided that compatibility was good.
And so our calling convention
is as much like Linux and other
Unix-like platforms as possible.
So this means that if you have
assembly code or developer tools
or whatnot that were built for
Linux or FreeBSD for x86-64,
then bringing them over to 64-bit
Intel and Mac OS X should actually
be reasonably straightforward.
So we pass six arguments,
six integer arguments and registers.
We start with RDI and then RSI, RDX, RCX,
R8, and R9.
After that, we spell onto the stack.
Floating point arguments are
passed in XMM0 through XMM7.
The return value comes back in RAX.
That's a lot like 32-bit, at least.
And what all of this adds up to is that,
at least conceptually,
this is pretty similar to PowerPC,
where we're passing arguments and
registers up to a certain number
and then spelling out the stack
and returning values and registers.
It's a lot more like PowerPC, certainly,
than 32-bit Intel was.
Documentation for this calling
convention is up at x86-64.org.
This is one of the great things about
being as much like Linux and other Unix
as possible is that we can actually say,
you know what?
The documentation that's out there,
that's been out there for a while now,
works great for us.
So I'll give you a quick example
of how this calling convention
actually works and how you would
go about using it in debugging.
So let's say that you wanted to
print out all of the file names
that an application was opening
as it went about opening them.
So you set a breakpoint on open,
and then you can set a breakpoint command
that will just print out the first
argument and then continue and end,
which means that when
you run your application,
you'll just get this continuous stream
of all of the file names that get opened.
So you can see, say,
where it's looking for preference
files and things like that.
Here's how you would have
done that for 32-bit Intel.
Star, car star star, ESP plus four,
and you'd have to know that that's
ESP because open is a frameless function,
and to do that you'd
have to disassemble open.
That's really not very much fun at all.
Here's how you do it for 64-bit Intel.
First argument's an RDI.
Print RDI.
Nice and simple.
And when you run that,
you get all of the file names here
from a 64-bit version of TextEdit.
How about Objective-C?
Now Objective-C, of course,
the first argument is self,
and the second argument is the selector.
So the first argument to a function is
actually the third argument that really
gets passed in the calling convention.
So here,
if we wanted to print out the title
of every window as that was changed,
then we set a breakpoint
on NSWindowSetTitle.
And then what are we going
to hand over to print object?
Well, for 32-bit on Intel, again,
this is really messy.
You have to know that actually
NSWindowSetTitle does have a frame,
and therefore you reference your
arguments off of EBP instead of ESP.
And you have to dereference things.
It's just kind of nasty.
So 64-bit, it's a lot easier.
It's the third argument.
That's an RDX.
Pass that straight to print object,
and so you can get all
of your window titles.
How does this compare to Windows?
If you already have
64-bit code for Windows,
then you'll find that a few
things are different here.
And again, here, Mac OS X is a lot like
Linux and other Unixes,
but Windows is just the odd one out.
Microsoft went with the LLP64 data model.
That means that long,
longs and pointers are 64-bit.
For us, longs and pointers are 64-bit.
What that means is that if you have
C code that you want to be cross-platform
for 64-bit between Windows and Mac OS X,
then you may want to avoid the
long type altogether and use ints
for your 32-bit values and long
longs for your 64-bit values.
And then that'll be
compatible back and forth.
Or, of course, use explicitly sized
types like UN32T and N64T.
How about passing arguments and
registers for the calling convention?
We passed the first six
arguments and registers.
They passed the first four
And just to make that
much more interesting,
their first four are our last four.
So that makes porting assembly
code kind of difficult.
Volatile registers,
all of the argument registers plus R10
and R11 are volatile for both platforms.
But again, since the argument
registers are different,
that means that you have
different volatile registers.
And volatile XMM registers,
all of them are volatile on Mac OS X.
On Windows,
only XMM0 through XMM5 are volatile
and the rest are preserved.
So if you're bringing code over that
assumes that those will be preserved,
then you'll have to
update that for Mac OS X.
What all of this adds up to
is that for the most part,
most 64-bit Intel assembly
code will be preserved.
So it's going to be different
between Mac OS X and Windows.
And that's unfortunate, but in this case,
Microsoft went one direction,
the rest of the world went the other.
So again, if you have Linux or
FreeBSD assembly code,
then that should come
over reasonably easily.
But if you have code from Windows,
you'll have to change it a bit.
How about our memory
layout for 64-bit systems?
Since we have gobs and
gobs and gobs of memory,
what do we do with all of it?
Well, 0 to 4 gigabytes is used for the
kernel and the 32-bit address space.
Our kernel is still 32-bit in Leopard,
and so it has to sit down there.
From 4 gigs to 128 terabytes are
64-bit applications and libraries.
It's pretty unlikely that you'll
write an application that actually
uses all of that right now.
I mean, the Mac Pro can only fit
up to 16 gigabytes of RAM.
So if you actually tried
to use 128 terabytes,
you'd be paging for a long time.
But you can try, if you'd like.
Now,
from 128 terabytes to some very large
number that I couldn't do the math for,
this is not addressable.
This is a hole in the address space.
This isn't some special feature of
Mac OS X where we just decide to stamp
out the middle of the address space.
Instead, this is due to the architecture
of Intel 64-bit chips right now.
But you're probably not missing this,
because again, you really can't touch 128
terabytes of pages today.
So that hole itself wouldn't
help you all that much.
And from that address and up,
what we actually refer to as
the negative address space,
because it's easier to think
about if you go backwards from 0,
that's reserved for future kernel usage.
So you can't allocate
memory in that space today.
I'd like to talk a bit about
that 0 to 4-gigabyte range.
This is particularly interesting as you
migrate code from 32-bits to 64-bits,
because as Matt mentioned and
as Ali mentioned yesterday,
we see a lot of bugs in code
that migrates to 64-bits,
where people are truncating pointers.
And of course,
if your code is still running
within the low 4 gigs,
then a truncated pointer will
continue to work just fine.
So to reach the 64-bit apprentice
level that Ali described yesterday,
you want to make sure that your
application runs above 4 gigs,
and so all of your pointers are up high.
Now, the linker defaults to a
4-gigabyte page zero size when
building for 10.5 or later.
This means that it'll simply
carve out the low 4 gigabytes of
your address space that isn't,
say, malloc-allocated memory.
It's just mapped out of your space,
and none of your code will
end up running in there.
But if you're running
64-bit PowerPC code,
there are a couple of ways to
get your PowerPC 64 application
to load in the low 4 gigs.
And one, which is actually on by default,
is to build with -m dynamic no-pick.
This is good for performance reasons,
so it'll make your PPC 64
code run a little bit faster.
But when you turn this on,
your application will actually
load in the low 2 gigs,
and the rest of that space up
to 4 gigs will be blocked out,
so no shared libraries will load there.
But your application,
if it's truncating pointers,
will still be able to do that.
So if you want to make sure
that you can get to that 64-bit
apprentice level and that you
are not truncating your pointers,
then you want to turn
off m dynamic no-pick,
at least for testing.
And once you're sure
that you're 64-bit clean,
then you can turn that on and get the
performance boost back for PPC 64.
Another way to do this is
to use a Mac OS X deployment
target of 10.4 or earlier.
And the third way is to
explicitly set the pay zero size,
to say, "Really, trust me,
you don't want the 4 gig page zero.
I just want, say, one page."
This is somewhat different on Intel.
The only way to get an Intel application
to load in the low 4 gigs is to
explicitly set the page zero size.
So regardless of your deployment target,
regardless of the value
of Mdynamic no-pick,
your Intel application
will load above 4 gigs.
This means that if you move to PPC64
first and then move to 64-bit Intel,
then you may not notice your
pointer truncation errors until
you move to the Intel side.
Now, why did we do it this way?
First, 64-bitness, to really enforce,
to ensure that you don't have
pointer truncation problems.
But secondly, actually for performance.
Due to the architecture of the virtual
memory system on the Intel systems,
if we have your application
not overlap with the kernel,
then kernel user space, and again,
the kernel is in the low 4 gigs,
then kernel user space
transitions are that much faster.
We can actually special case
applications that have a 4-gig page zero.
And make all of your system
calls that much faster.
So another thing that's
nice about 64-bit on Intel.
So a summary about everything
about 64-bit In-Debt.
API migration,
Matt talked an awful lot about this,
and there's lots and lots to know.
Basically, what this comes down to is
that we've modernized our APIs.
The things that we've been telling
you for years are sort of the
future direction of the platform,
are the things that are
available for 64-bit,
and the things that we've been
deprecating or trying to move away
from are generally not available.
Again, the most important one there is to
migrate from Quick Draw over to Quartz.
For 64-bit on Intel,
it's also a modernization,
but in this case,
a modernization of the architecture
rather than of the APIs.
The quick summary is that it's simpler,
faster, and better.
We love this architecture.
It's going to be great
for us in the future,
and we hope that your applications
can take advantage of it.
We have three 64-bit
labs throughout the show.
The first one starts at 2 o'clock today.
They're all in Mac OS X Lab B.
And I encourage you to bring your code
by and start the process of moving
your application over to 64-bit.
I think we have a bunch
of Mac pros there.
And you can give it a shot.